+++
title = 'Making This Website'
date = 2026-02-10T13:33:00-05:00
draft = true
tags = ['hugo', 'tutorial']
+++
# How did you make this website?
It was simple, really. I used ***Hugo*** and ***GitHub Pages***. (Along with some other tools and infrastructure.) This post is intended to be a simple and to-the-point guide on how to make this *exact* website, but I'll also do my best to point out which choices could be made differently to create a slightly *different* website than this. I may or may not update this guide in the future to reflect any changes I make to the structure of the site. This guide shouldn't be too difficult to follow for someone without much programming experience, so more advanced users might want to skip around a little. With that, here we go!

## Making the website
The first step, in my opinion, should be to build the website itself. There's no sense in worrying yourself about hosting options and infrastructure before you've even created a presentable website to host. A simple portfolio/blog site such as this is called a *static* site, meaning that there are no underlying databases or other backend functionality. That's not to say that the website can't be made interactive with JavaScript, CSS animations, etc., but there is no work being done on the server's part when a user interacts with the website.

### Installation
The easiest way to create a static site is to use a *static site generator* (SSG). There are many of these available, but the most popular are **Hugo** and **Jekyll**. Both function very similarly, and are supported by basically every hosting platform. Jekyll is generally considered to be more compatible with GitHub Pages than Hugo, but I didn't find this to be the case in my own testing. There are many Jekyll themes that are **not** compatible with GitHub Pages, whereas just about any Hugo theme can be made compatible using free GitHub Actions workflows. For this reason, I decided to create this website using ***Hugo*** over Jekyll, but many of the steps in this guide could be used with Jekyll as well.

In order to begin working with Hugo, you need to install it onto your device. It should be fully compatible with Windows, Linux, BSD, and MacOS. Although, if you're using Windows, I'd recommend installing [Windows Subsystem for Linux](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) first since Linux is generally more predictable than Windows, and will make following this guide a lot easier. If you have some kind of limited operating system like a Chromebook or mobile device, things are a little trickier, but you should be able to simply skip ahead to the setup of GitHub pages and then do all of your development directly on GitHub, rather than installing anything locally. To install Hugo, you'll need to install both the Hugo program and Git onto your device. Git is the program we'll be using to install themes, keep track of changes to our site, and publish them to GitHub. You can install git from the [git website](https://git-scm.com/install/), then Hugo from the [Hugo website](https://gohugo.io/installation/) by scrolling down to the "Package Managers" section for your operating system. Windows users using WSL should follow the Linux instructions for Debian.

### Creating a site
With all the tools we need installed, now it's time to initialize a new Hugo site. First, open a terminal. Navigate to the folder where you want your website files to live. This could simply be your `Documents` folder, or wherever sounds good to you. To check that Hugo is installed properly, you can run the command `hugo version`, which should display a number greater than `v0.146.0`. Assuming Hugo is installed, you can then create your site with the command `hugo new site mysite`, where "mysite" can be replaced with any name you want for your website, as long as there are no spaces. Hugo will create a new folder for your website, which you can enter with `cd mysite`. There are many files in here, but most of them are irrelevant to us for our simple website. We'll be using `hugo.toml` to change settings for our site, and placing files in `content/` and `static/` for the pages and images in our site, respectively. Before we do this though, it's time to choose a theme!

### Installing a theme
**Themes** in Hugo are essentially templates for your website, similar to what you'd find in a traditional website builder like Wix or Squarespace. They give you starting layouts and pages to easily place your content into, so that you don't have to do any frontend programming yourself. They often come with their own custom settings and pages, designed to make customization as easy for you as simply editing some text in your `hugo.toml` file. Hugo themes can be found in many different places online, and there's no "wrong" way to find one. The simplest way to locate a theme, however, is to look through the [official listing](https://themes.gohugo.io/) on Hugo's own website. This is where I found the theme I currently use for this website, [Poison](https://themes.gohugo.io/themes/poison/) by Luke Orth.

Once you've found a theme that looks just right, installing it is easy. Some themes will have custom instructions or warnings in the README of their repository, but for the most part, Hugo's official instructions will work fine. First, locate the URL to your theme's repository. This should be the "download" link on the Hugo theme page, and will usually be a page on GitHub. Once you've copied this link, switch back to your terminal. We can instruct git to begin tracking our website by running the command `git init`, which will give us the ability to install themes. Next, we run the command `git submodule add <URL here>.git themes/<theme name here>`. Notice that the URL should have `.git` typed at the end, and that the theme name after `themes/` should be written the same as it is after the `/` at the end of the URL. For example, if I'm installing Poison, my URL will be typed as `https://github.com/lukeorth/poison.git`, and the last argument in the command will be written as `themes/poison`. This command downloads and installs the theme you've chosen into the `themes` folder of your website, which makes it available for us to use.

Now, we simply have to select the theme we've installed by setting it in our `hugo.toml` file. This would be a good time to check whether your theme comes with an example configuration file, which would probably be mentioned somewhere in the README file on its GitHub page. If there is one, copy it. Our `hugo.toml` file is simply a text file, so you can edit it using your favorite text editor. Something basic like Notepad will work fine, but I would recommend using a code-focused text editor like Notepad++, Sublime Text, Vim, etc. If you've copied an example file, highlight everything in the file and paste over it. Otherwise, simply add to the very top of the file: `theme = '<theme name>'`, keeping the quotation marks and using the same theme name as before.

With this, our theme should be enabled! Now we just have to test it. To test your website anytime you want, you can simply run the command `hugo server`, which will host a local copy of your website and give you a link to view it, which should be near the end of the output and start with `http://`. Now, simply try clicking this link or copying it into your web browser, and fingers crossed, your website should load! It won't look like much at this point since we haven't created a homepage yet, but you'll most likely be able to see a bit of your chosen theme showing.

Now that we have our theme fully installed, this would be a great time to save some of our changes. The best way to do this is by creating a **commit** using git, which is essentially a labeled snapshot in time of the current state of our website. This is easily done by running the command `git commit -m "Theme installed"`, where the part in quotes after `-m` is our *commit message*. Feel free to write anything you want in your commit message, as long as it will help your future self remember what you changed with this commit.
